@c This is part of the Guile-OpenGL Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc. and others.
@c See the file guile-opengl.texi for copying conditions.

@node GLU
@chapter GLU

@menu
* GLU API::                     The high-level interface to GLU.
* Low-Level GLU::               Primitive interface to ``glu'' functionality.
@end menu

@node GLU API
@section GLU API

Import the GLU module to have access to these procedures:

@example
(use-modules (glu))
@end example

The GLU specification is available at
@uref{http://www.opengl.org/registry/doc/glu1.3.pdf}.

@menu
* Initialization::
* Mipmapping::
* Matrix Manipulation::
* Polygon Tesselation::
* Quadrics::
* NURBS::
* Errors::
@end menu

@node Initialization
@subsection Initialization

@node Mipmapping
@subsection Mipmapping

@node Matrix Manipulation
@subsection Matrix Manipulation

@defun glu-perspective fov-y aspect z-near z-far
Set up a perspective projection matrix.

@var{fov-y} is the field of view angle, in degrees, in the Y
direction.  @var{aspect} is the ratio of width to height.
@var{z-near} and @var{z-far} are the distances from the viewer to the
near and far clipping planes, respectively.

The resulting matrix is multiplied against the current matrix.
@end defun

@node Polygon Tesselation
@subsection Polygon Tesselation

@node Quadrics
@subsection Quadrics

@node NURBS
@subsection NURBS

@node Errors
@subsection Errors

@node Low-Level GLU
@section Low-Level GLU
@include low-level-glu.texi


