@c This is part of the Guile-OpenGL Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc. and others.
@c See the file guile-opengl.texi for copying conditions.

@node GLUT
@chapter GLUT

Import the GLUT module to have access to these procedures:

@example
(use-modules (glut))
@end example

The GLUT specification is available at
@uref{http://www.opengl.org/resources/libraries/glut/glut-3.spec.pdf}.

@menu
* GLUT Initialization::
* Beginning Event Processing::
* Window Management::
* Overlay Management::
* Menu Management::
* Callback Registration::
* Color Index Colormap Management::
* State Retrieval::
* Font Rendering::
* Geometric Object Rendering::
@end menu


@node GLUT Initialization
@section GLUT Initialization

@anchor{set-initial-display-mode}
@defun set-initial-display-mode mode
@end defun

@anchor{set-initial-window-position}
@defun set-initial-window-position x y
@end defun

@anchor{set-initial-window-size}
@defun set-initial-window-size width height
@end defun

@anchor{initialize-glut}
@defun initialize-glut [args] [#:window-position] [#:window-size] [#:display-mode]
@end defun


@node Beginning Event Processing
@section Beginning Event Processing

@anchor{glut-main-loop}
@defun glut-main-loop 
@end defun


@node Window Management
@section Window Management

@anchor{window-id}
@defun window-id 
@end defun

@anchor{window-live?}
@defun window-live? 
@end defun

@anchor{window?}
@defun window? 
@end defun

@anchor{set-window-cursor!}
@defun set-window-cursor! window cursor
@end defun

@anchor{set-window-icon-title!}
@defun set-window-icon-title! window str
@end defun

@anchor{set-window-title!}
@defun set-window-title! window str
@end defun

@anchor{show-window}
@defun show-window [window]
@end defun

@anchor{sub-window?}
@defun sub-window? window
@end defun

@anchor{swap-buffers}
@defun swap-buffers [window]
@end defun

@anchor{top-level-window?}
@defun top-level-window? window
@end defun

@anchor{with-window}
@defmac with-window window body1 body2 ...
@end defmac

@anchor{with-window*}
@defun with-window* _ _
@end defun

@anchor{make-sub-window}
@defun make-sub-window window x y width height
@end defun

@anchor{make-window}
@defun make-window str
@end defun

@anchor{pop-window}
@defun pop-window 
@end defun

@anchor{position-window}
@defun position-window window x y
@end defun

@anchor{post-redisplay}
@defun post-redisplay [window]
@end defun

@anchor{push-window}
@defun push-window 
@end defun

@anchor{reshape-window}
@defun reshape-window window width height
@end defun

@anchor{current-window}
@defun current-window 
@end defun

@anchor{destroy-window}
@defun destroy-window window
@end defun

@anchor{full-screen}
@defun full-screen window full-screen?
@end defun

@anchor{hide-window}
@defun hide-window [window]
@end defun

@anchor{iconify-window}
@defun iconify-window [window]
@end defun


@node Overlay Management
@section Overlay Management


@node Menu Management
@section Menu Management


@node Callback Registration
@section Callback Registration

@anchor{set-button-box-callback}
@defun set-button-box-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-current-window}
@defun set-current-window window
@end defun

@anchor{set-dials-callback}
@defun set-dials-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-display-callback}
@defun set-display-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-entry-callback}
@defun set-entry-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-idle-callback}
@defun set-idle-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-keyboard-callback}
@defun set-keyboard-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-menu-status-callback}
@defun set-menu-status-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-motion-callback}
@defun set-motion-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-mouse-callback}
@defun set-mouse-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-overlay-display-callback}
@defun set-overlay-display-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-passive-motion-callback}
@defun set-passive-motion-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-reshape-callback}
@defun set-reshape-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-spaceball-button-callback}
@defun set-spaceball-button-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-spaceball-motion-callback}
@defun set-spaceball-motion-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-spaceball-rotate-callback}
@defun set-spaceball-rotate-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-special-callback}
@defun set-special-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-tablet-button-callback}
@defun set-tablet-button-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-tablet-motion-callback}
@defun set-tablet-motion-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{set-visibility-callback}
@defun set-visibility-callback func
@end defun

@anchor{add-timer-callback}
@defun add-timer-callback msecs func value
@end defun


@node Color Index Colormap Management
@section Color Index Colormap Management


@node State Retrieval
@section State Retrieval

@anchor{window-alpha-size}
@defun window-alpha-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-blue-size}
@defun window-blue-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-color-buffer-size}
@defun window-color-buffer-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-colormap-size}
@defun window-colormap-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-depth-buffer-size}
@defun window-depth-buffer-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-double-buffered?}
@defun window-double-buffered? window
@end defun

@anchor{window-green-size}
@defun window-green-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-height}
@defun window-height width
@end defun

@anchor{window-number-of-children}
@defun window-number-of-children window
@end defun

@anchor{window-number-of-samples}
@defun window-number-of-samples window
@end defun

@anchor{window-parent}
@defun window-parent window
@end defun

@anchor{window-position}
@defun window-position window
@end defun

@anchor{window-red-size}
@defun window-red-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-size}
@defun window-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-stencil-buffer-size}
@defun window-stencil-buffer-size window
@end defun

@anchor{window-stereo?}
@defun window-stereo? window
@end defun

@anchor{window-rgba?}
@defun window-rgba window
@end defun

@anchor{window-width}
@defun window-width width
@end defun

@anchor{window-x}
@defun window-x width
@end defun

@anchor{window-y}
@defun window-y width
@end defun

@anchor{screen-height}
@defun screen-height 
@end defun

@anchor{screen-height-mm}
@defun screen-height-mm 
@end defun

@anchor{screen-size}
@defun screen-size 
@end defun

@anchor{screen-size-mm}
@defun screen-size-mm 
@end defun

@anchor{screen-width}
@defun screen-width 
@end defun

@anchor{screen-width-mm}
@defun screen-width-mm 
@end defun

@anchor{display-mode-possible?}
@defun display-mode-possible? 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-display-mode}
@defun initial-display-mode 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-height}
@defun initial-window-height 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-position}
@defun initial-window-position 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-size}
@defun initial-window-size 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-width}
@defun initial-window-width 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-x}
@defun initial-window-x 
@end defun

@anchor{initial-window-y}
@defun initial-window-y 
@end defun

@anchor{elapsed-time}
@defun elapsed-time 
@end defun


@node Font Rendering
@section Font Rendering


@node Geometric Object Rendering
@section Geometric Object Rendering

